Discovering personalized driver mutation profiles of single samples in cancer by network control strategy.
Motivation: It is a challenging task to discover personalized driver genes thatprovide crucial information on disease risk and drug sensitivity for individualpatients. However, few methods have been proposed to identify thepersonalized-sample driver genes from the cancer omics data due to the lack ofsamples for each individual. To circumvent this problem, here we present a novel single-sample controller strategy (SCS) to identify personalized driver mutation profiles from network controllability perspective.
Results: SCS integrates mutation data and expression data into a referencemolecular network for each patient to obtain the driver mutation profiles in apersonalized-sample manner. This is the first such a computational framework, to bridge the personalized driver mutation discovery problem and the structuralnetwork controllability problem. The key idea of SCS is to detect those mutatedgenes which can achieve the transition from the normal state to the disease statebased on each individual omics data from network controllability perspective. We widely validate the driver mutation profiles of our SCS from three aspects: (i)the improved precision for the predicted driver genes in the population compared with other driver-focus methods; (ii) the effectiveness for discovering thepersonalized driver genes; (iii) the application to the risk assessment throughthe integration of the driver mutation signature and expression data respectivelyacross the five distinct benchmarks from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Inconclusion, our SCS makes efficient and robust personalized driver mutationprofiles predictions, opening new avenues in personalized medicine and targetedcancer therapy.
Availability: The MATLAB-package for our SCS is freely available from http://sysbio.sibcb.ac.cn/cb/chenlab/software.htm.
Contact: zhangsw@nwpu.edu.cn, zengtao@sibs.ac.cn, lnchen@sibs.ac.cn.
Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.