Splice Expression Variation Analysis (SEVA) for Inter-tumor Heterogeneity of Gene Isoform Usage in Cancer.
Motivation: Current bioinformatics methods to detect changes in gene isoformusage in distinct phenotypes compare the relative expected isoform usage inphenotypes. These statistics model differences in isoform usage in normaltissues, which have stable regulation of gene splicing. Pathological conditions, such as cancer, can have broken regulation of splicing that increases theheterogeneity of the expression of splice variants. Inferring events with suchdifferential heterogeneity in gene isoform usage requires new statistical approaches.
Results: We introduce Splice Expression Variability Analysis (SEVA) to modelincreased heterogeneity of splice variant usage between conditions (e.g., tumorand normal samples). SEVA uses a rank-based multivariate statistic that compares the variability of junction expression profiles within one condition to thevariability within another. Simulated data show that SEVA is unique in modelingheterogeneity of gene isoform usage, and benchmark SEVA's performance againstEBSeq, DiffSplice, and rMATS that model differential isoform usage instead ofheterogeneity. We confirm the accuracy of SEVA in identifying known splicevariants in head and neck cancer and perform cross-study validation of novelsplice variants. A novel comparison of splice variant heterogeneity betweensubtypes of head and neck cancer demonstrated unanticipated similarity betweenthe heterogeneity of gene isoform usage in HPV-positive and HPV-negative subtypesand anticipated increased heterogeneity among HPV-negative samples with mutationsin genes that regulate the splice variant machinery.
Conclusion: These results show that SEVA accurately models differentialheterogeneity of gene isoform usage from RNA-seq data.
Availability: SEVA is implemented in the R/Bioconductor package GSReg.
Contact: bahman@jhu.edu, ejfertig@jhmi.edu.
Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.