Enhanced guide-RNA design and targeting analysis for precise CRISPR genomeediting of single and consortia of industrially relevant and non-model organisms.
Motivation: Genetic diversity of non-model organisms offers a repertoire ofunique phenotypic features for exploration and cultivation for synthetic biology and metabolic engineering applications. To realize this enormous potential, it iscritical to have an efficient genome editing tool for rapid strain engineering ofthese organisms to perform novel programmed functions.
Results: To accommodate the use of CRISPR/Cas systems for genome editing acrossorganisms, we have developed a novel method, named CRISPR Associated Software forPathway Engineering and Research (CASPER), for identifying on- and off-targetswith enhanced predictability coupled with an analysis of non-unique (repeated)targets to assist in editing any organism with various endonucleases. UtilizingCASPER, we demonstrated a modest 2.4% and significant 30.2% improvement (F-test, P?\u003c?0.05) over the conventional methods for predicting on- and off-targetactivities, respectively. Further we used CASPER to develop novel applications ingenome editing: multitargeting analysis (i.e. simultaneous multiple-sitemodification on a target genome with a sole guide-RNA requirement) andmultispecies population analysis (i.e. guide-RNA design for genome editing acrossa consortium of organisms). Our analysis on a selection of industrially relevant organisms revealed a number of non-unique target sites associated with genes and transposable elements that can be used as potential sites for multitargeting. Theanalysis also identified shared and unshared targets that enable genome editingof single or multiple genomes in a consortium of interest. We envision CASPER as a useful platform to enhance the precise CRISPR genome editing for metabolicengineering and synthetic biology applications.
Availability and implementation: https://github.com/TrinhLab/CASPER.
Contact: ctrinh@utk.edu.
Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.