QuantumClone: Clonal assessment of functional mutations in cancer based on a genotype-aware method for clonal reconstruction.
Motivation: In cancer, clonal evolution is assessed based on information comingfrom single nucleotide variants and copy number alterations. Nonetheless,existing methods often fail to accurately combine information from both sourcesto truthfully reconstruct clonal populations in a given tumor sample or in a set of tumor samples coming from the same patient. Moreover, previously publishedmethods detect clones from a single set of variants. As a result, compromiseshave to be done between stringent variant filtering (reducing dispersion invariant allele frequency estimates, VAFs) and using all biologically relevantvariants.
Results: We present a framework for defining cancer clones using most reliablevariants of high depth of coverage and assigning functional mutations to thedetected clones. The key element of our framework is QuantumClone, a method forvariant clustering into clones based on VAFs, genotypes of corresponding regions and information about tumor purity. We validated QuantumClone and our frameworkon simulated data. We then applied our framework to whole genome sequencing data for 19 neuroblastoma trios each including constitutional, diagnosis and relapsesamples. We confirmed an enrichment of damaging variants within such pathways as MAPK, neuritogenesis, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, cell survival and DNArepair. Most pathways had more damaging variants in the expanding clones comparedto shrinking ones, which can be explained by the increased total number ofvariants between these two populations. Functional mutational rate varied forancestral clones and clones shrinking or expanding upon treatment, suggestingchanges in clone selection mechanisms at different time points of tumorevolution.
Availability and Implementation: Source code and binaries of the QuantumClone Rpackage are freely available for download athttps://CRAN.R-project.org/package=QuantumClone.
Contact: gudrun.schleiermacher@curie.fr or valentina.boeva@inserm.fr.
Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.