Informational and Linguistic Analysis of Large Genomic Sequence Collections via Efficient Hadoop Cluster Algorithms.
Motivation: Information theoretic and compositional/linguistic analysis ofgenomes have a central role in bioinformatics, even more so since the associated methodologies are becoming very valuable also for epigenomic and meta-genomicstudies. The kernel of those methods is based on the collection of k-merstatistics, i.e., how many times each k-mer in A;C; G; T k occurs in a DNAsequence. Although this problem is computationally very simple and efficientlysolvable on a conventional computer, the sheer amount of data available now inapplications demands to resort to parallel and distributed computing. Indeed,those type of algorithms have been developed to collect k-mer statistics in therealm of genome assembly. However, they are so specialized to this domain thatthey do not extend easily to the computation of informational and linguisticindices, concurrently on sets of genomes.
Results: Following the well established approach in many disciplines, and with a growing success also in bioinformatics, to resort to MapReduce and Hadoop to dealwith Big Data problems, we present KCH, the first set of MapReduce algorithmsable to perform concurrently informational and linguistic analysis of largecollections of genomic sequences on a Hadoop cluster. The benchmarking of KCHthat we provide indicates that it is quite effective and versatile. It is alsocompetitive with respect to the parallel and distributed algorithms highlyspecialized to k-mer statistics collection for genome assembly problems. Inconclusion, KCH is a much needed addition to the growing number of algorithms andtools that use MapReduce for bioinformatics core applications.Availability: The software, including instructions for running it over AmazonAWS, as well as the datasets are available at http://www.di-srv.unisa.it/KCH.
Contact: umberto.ferraro@uniroma1.it.
Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.