iPat: Intelligent Prediction and Association Tool for Genomic Research.
Summary: The ultimate goal of genomic research is to effectively predictphenotypes from genotypes so that medical management can improve human health andmolecular breeding can increase agricultural production. Genomic prediction orselection (GS) plays a complementary role to genome-wide association studies(GWAS), which is the primary method to identify genes underlying phenotypes.Unfortunately, most computing tools cannot perform data analyses for both GWASand GS. Furthermore, the majority of these tools are executed through acommand-line interface (CLI), which requires programming skills. Non-programmers struggle to use them efficiently because of the steep learning curves and zerotolerance for data formats and mistakes when inputting keywords and parameters.To address these problems, this study developed a software package, named theIntelligent Prediction and Association Tool (iPat), with a user-friendlygraphical user interface (GUI). With iPat, GWAS or GS can be performed using apointing device to simply drag and/or click on graphical elements to specifyinput data files, choose input parameters, and select analytical models. Modelsavailable to users include those implemented in third party CLI packages such as GAPIT, PLINK, FarmCPU, BLINK, rrBLUP, and BGLR. Users can choose any data format and conduct analyses with any of these packages. File conversions areautomatically conducted for specified input data and selected packages. AGWAS-assisted genomic prediction method was implemented to perform genomicprediction using any GWAS method such as FarmCPU. iPat was written in Java foradaptation to multiple operating systems including Windows, Mac, and Linux.Availability: The iPat executable file, user manual, tutorials, and exampledatasets are freely available at http://zzlab.net/iPat.
Contact: Zhiwu.Zhang@WSU.edu.
Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformaticsonline.