Glycoform-dependent conformational alteration of the Fc region of human immunoglobulin G1 as revealed by NMR spectroscopy
Abstract
The Fc portion of immunoglobulin G (IgG) expresses the biantennary complex type oligosaccharides at Asn297 of the CH2 domain of each heavy chain with microheterogeneities depending on physiological and pathological states. These N-glycans are known to be essential for promotion of proper effector functions of IgG such as complement activation and Fc? receptor (Fc?R)-mediated activities. To gain a better understanding of the role of Fc glycosylation, we prepared a series of truncated glycoforms of human IgG1-Fc and analyzed their interactions with human soluble Fc?RIIIa (sFc?RIIIa) and with staphylococcal protein A by surface plasmon resonance and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) methods. Progressive but less pronounced reductions in the affinity for sFc?RIIIa were observed as a result of the galactosidase and subsequent N-acetylhexosaminidase treatments of IgG1-Fc. The following endoglycosidase D treatment, giving rise to a disaccharide structure composed of a fucosylated GlcNAc, abrogated the affinity of IgG1-Fc for sFc?RIIIa. On the other hand, those glycosidase treatments did not significantly affect the affinity of IgG1-Fc for protein A. Inspection of stable-isotope-assisted NMR data of a series of Fc glycoforms indicates that the stepwise trimming out of the carbohydrate residues results in concomitant increase in the number of amino acid residues perturbed thereby in the CH2 domains. Furthermore, the cleavage at the GlcNAcﬂ1-4GlcNAc glycosidic linkage induced the conformational alterations of part of the lower hinge region, which makes no direct contact with the carbohydrate moieties and forms the major Fc?R-binding site, while the conformation of the CH2/CH3 interface was barely perturbed that is the protein A-binding site. These results indicate that the carbohydrate moieties are required for maintaining the structural integrity of the Fc?R-binding site.